# AI Assistants in Doom Emacs 31 on macOS with Clojure MCP server
description: 
keywords:  ai llm emacs mcp clojure setup claude copilot gptel doom-emacs
author:  Yann Esposito
email:  yann@esposito.host
=> /files/publickey.txt gpg
date:  [2025-06-17 Tue]

______
This article is about how to setup Emacs (doom-emacs in particlar) to work with
most AI Assitants for Clojure projects using Clojure-MCP to provide the AI
assistant the ability to run commands in the Clojure REPL.
______

# Introduction

By the end of this article, you'll be able to give instructions to the AI
Assistant and it will use the REPL of your specific project to execute them.
For example, I asked the assistant to list all users in my project's database
(running locally, of course).
With my setup, the assistant could:

* analyze the project (source and document files)
* discover the service and functions that could perform the operation to list all users
* ran the code in the repl, and got back all users
* used this answer to group the users (by org which makes sense for my project)
* rendered the result as an org-mode file.

I ran into a few bumps along the way since this setup uses some pretty
cutting-edge tools and libraries.
It took me a bit of time to work through these issues, which is exactly why I'm
putting this article together - partly to help others who might face the same
challenges, and partly as a reference for my future self.

If you follow this guide you should endup with a fully working setup with:
Emacs + AI Assitant + Clojure-MCP development environment.

* **Platform**: macOS
* **Editor**: Emacs Plus 31 with Doom Emacs
* **Emacs packages**:

=> https://github.com/karthink/gptel =gptel=
 for LLM interaction

=> https://github.com/lizqwerscott/mcp.el mcp
 (Model Context Protocol) support
* **Development Stack**:

=> https://github.com/bhauman/clojure-mcp =clojure-mcp=
 server
  - Custom MCP startup scripts for project integration

# Steps
## Emacs
### Install latest emacs-plus

```bash
brew install emacs-plus --with-native-comp --with-modern-black-dragon-icon
```

**** emacs-plus and native-comp shenanigans

Currently to fix emacs-plus from brew on macOS native-comp, add this to the
beginning of your =~/.emacs.d/early-init.el=.

```emacs-lisp
;; FIX NATIVE COMP: https://github.com/d12frosted/homebrew-emacs-plus/issues/554#issuecomment-2909894593
(setenv "LIBRARY_PATH"
        (mapconcat 'identity
                   '("/opt/homebrew/opt/gcc/lib/gcc/15"
                     "/opt/homebrew/opt/libgccjit/lib/gcc/15"
                     "/opt/homebrew/opt/gcc/lib/gcc/15/gcc/aarch64-apple-darwin24/15")
                   ":"))
```

### doom-emacs

As I started from an already existing ~doom-emacs~ installation. I will not cover
that part. Please refer to the doom-emacs installation

=> https://github.com/doomemacs/doomemacs?tab=readme-ov-file#install project documentation
 if
you want to install it .

**** Declare the new packages to use

In =config.el=:

```elisp
...
:tools
  ...
  llm ;; <- uncomment this line
  ...
```

In =~/.doom.d/packages.el=:

```elisp
(package! mcp
    :pin "3a380185597f56290057f370ab65dde89a20a18f")
```

Then configure the packages:

In =~/.doom.d/config.el=:

```elisp
;; LLM
(use-package! gptel
  :init
  ;; declare the default llm configuration
  ;; for me this is co-pilot with claude-sonnet-4
  (setq gptel-default-mode 'org-mode ;; I want the llm to reply to me with org-mode format.
        gptel-backend (gptel-make-gh-copilot "Copilot")
        gptel-model 'claude-sonnet-4)
  (require 'gptel-integrations) ;; <- for mcp
  ;; declare another llm configuration, I also use GPT4All to consume locally only
  (gptel-make-gpt4all "GPT4All"
                      :protocol "http"
                      :host "localhost:4891"
                      ;; "~/Library/Application Support/nomic.ai/GPT4All"
                      :models '(Meta-Llama-3-8B-Instruct.Q4_0.gguf)))

(use-package! mcp
  :after gptel
  :config (require 'mcp-hub)
  :init (setq mcp-hub-servers
              ;; this is the important block here
              ;; it tells that it can launch an MCP server for my-project by running the following
              ;; command line:
              ;;    clojure-mcp my-project
              '(("my-project" :command "clojure-mcp" :args ("my-project"))))
  :hook (after-init . mcp-hub-start-all-server))
```

**** Rebuild / Install doom-emacs

After using another emacs version you need to rebuild your emacs packages.

```bash
doom sync -u
doom rebuild
```

This will take a while.

## Clojure-MCP
### Update your global Clojure aliases

The file =~/.clojure/deps.edn=:

```clojure
{:aliases
 {:mcp
  {:deps {org.slf4j/slf4j-nop {:mvn/version "2.0.16"} ;; Required for stdio server
          com.bhauman/clojure-mcp {:git/url "https://github.com/bhauman/clojure-mcp.git"
                                   :git/tag "v0.1.4-alpha"
                                   :git/sha "080b29b"}}
   :exec-fn clojure-mcp.main/start-mcp-server
   :exec-args {:port 7888}}}
 }
```

### Create the command line to launch the Clojure MCP Server

```bash
#!/usr/bin/env bash

case $1 in
    my-project) PORT=7888;;
    *) echo "I don't know how to start this project ($1)" >&2
       exit 1;
esac

clojure -X:mcp --port $PORT
```

### Link Clojure MCP to your Clojure project

It is important to perform the operation in the correct order.
So *FIRST* go to your project and start the repl.
Personally I work on a very big professional Clojure project that started even
before =deps.edn= was thing in Clojure.
So I could start the repl with a lein command:

```bash
  lein repl :start :port 7888
  ```

Got it! Here's your project setup in a friendlier tone:

Since my project is pretty large and has its own restart helpers, I don't use
the headless mode that the clojure-mcp docs suggest.
Instead, I fire up the project with :start mode so I can manually load all the
namespaces and get everything running with a the ~(reset!)~ command.

Once my project is running (after ~reset!~) *ONLY THEN* I start the Clojure mcp server.

I could test that by running my ~clojure-mcp my-project~ command, and I get back a
list of JSON objects lines:

```bash
> clojure-mcp my-project
{"jsonrpc":"2.0","method":"notifications/tools/list_changed"}
...
{"jsonrpc":"2.0","method":"notifications/resources/list_changed"}
...
{"jsonrpc":"2.0","method":"notifications/prompts/list_changed"}
```

So this is a good sign.

## Using it

Now, everything should be ready to use.

After starting my repl, I launch emacs (if emacs was already started, you
probably need to restart your mcp server)

Once emacs is started, open gptel menu (~SPC o l m~).
Try to add tools (if they are not there ; type ~M+~ and start the mcp if not started)

Once done, here you go.

~SPC o l l~ => will create a new buffer to send orders to the LLM.
I started with:

______
Analyze the codebase structure, Document key files, dependencies and available
tools. Generate or update a comprehensive documentation in a format optimized
for LLM Assistants. Save this documentation in the file =PROJECT_SUMMARY.md=.
______

This should generate this =PROJECT_SUMMARY.md= file and you should generally
always add this file to your LLM session context when working on your project.

Now, to show how powerful this setup is, I could ask:

> Can you list all the users in the database?

And the AI Assistant (it was claude) was able to analyse the project, discover
the service to use, call the correct methods of this service to list all users
in my local environment DB.
The result was then rendered as a nice org-mode file where users were grouped by Org.
This was even better that what I could expect.

I could als ask how he could perform this operation, and the assistant returned
the commands he exectued in the repl.

=> /index.gmi Home
=> /gem-atom.xml Feed
=> /slides.gmi Slides
=> /about-me.gmi About

=> https://git.esy.fun code
=> https://espial.esy.fun/u:yogsototh bookmarks
=> https://espial.esy.fun/u:yogsototh/notes notes
