# Solaryzed: A Generalisation of Solarized
date:  [2020-03-01 Sun]
author:  Yann Esposito
email:  yann@esposito.host
=> /files/publickey.txt gpg
keywords:  colorscheme
description:  A generalization of solarized.
description:  I tried to keep the same fundamentals and to free some variables.

After many years using

=> https://ethanschoonover.com/solarized/ Solarized
 I changed to a new one.
I use it for my terminal, emacs and most of my tools.

This is inspired by both

=> https://ethanschoonover.com/solarized/ Solarized
 and

=> https://nordtheme.com Nord
.
I switched because I wanted a greyer theme.

Ethan Shoovnover the creator of Solarized gave plenty of information about
the creation of his colorscheme.
And I stumbled upon the

=> https://nordtheme.com Nord
 theme.
And I really liked it.
But while the colors are great, it is not as easy to switch from light to
dark theme than with solarized because Solarized has a lot of nice
properties.

So I kept the main principle used to create Solarized but freed a few parameters.
The tint of the dark and light colors for the background and the text, as
well as the contrast of the colors.

And I created this minimal application in Purescript:

https://solaryzed.esy.fun

It is still not perfect, because the real theme I use for my website as a
slightly bigger contrast for text.

Here is the CSS you could use:


______html
<style>#colors div {
  display: inline-block;
  height: 50.0px;
  width: 50.0px;
  margin: 2px 0;
  font-weight: bold;
  line-height: 50.0px;
  text-align: center; }
  #colors { padding: 10px; margin: 10px 0; }
</style>
<div id="colors">
______
{{{colorbox(b03,white,#202631)}}}
{{{colorbox(b02,white,#2b303c)}}}
{{{colorbox(b01,white,#595e6a)}}}
{{{colorbox(b00,white,#727782)}}}
{{{colorbox(b0,black,#8c919b)}}}
{{{colorbox(b1,black,#a7abb5)}}}
{{{colorbox(b2,black,#e5e8f0)}}}
{{{colorbox(b3,black,#f3f6fe)}}}
{{{colorbox(y,white,#ad8c51)}}}
{{{colorbox(o,white,#a9664b)}}}
{{{colorbox(r,white,#af6256)}}}
{{{colorbox(m,white,#ae5e7d)}}}
{{{colorbox(v,white,#6774b2)}}}
{{{colorbox(b,white,#408cc3)}}}
{{{colorbox(c,white,#17a198)}}}
{{{colorbox(g,white,#939452)}}}
______html
</div>
______

```css :tangle solaryzed.css
:root {
    color-scheme: light dark; /* support color scheme */
    --b03: #202631;
    --b02: #2b313c;
    --b01: #656b74;
    --b00: #727781;
    --b0:  #989ea8;
    --b1:  #b0bac7;
    --b2:  #e5e8ed;
    --b3:  #f4f7ff;
    --y:   #a98d50;
    --o:   #aa6550;
    --r:   #b85a64;
    --m:   #af53b0;
    --v:   #846f93;
    --b:   #5679a4;
    --c:   #4c8493;
    --g:   #728b5c;

    --bg:  var(--b3);
    --fg:  var(--b02);
    --fg0: var(--b0);  /* lower contrast */
    --bg2: var(--b2);  /* second color block background */
    --fg2: var(--b01); /* second color block foreground */
    --acc: var(--o);   /* accent color */
}

@media (prefers-color-scheme: dark) {
    :root {
        /* Dark */
        --bg: var(--b03);
        --fg: var(--b0);
        --fg0: var(--b00); /* lower contrast */
        --bg2: var(--b02); /* second color block background */
        --fg2: var(--b1);  /* second color block foreground */
        --acc: var(--g);   /* accent color */
    }
}

body,.main {
    background: var(--bg);
    color: var(--fg);
}
```

=> /index.gmi Home
=> /gem-atom.xml Feed
=> /slides.gmi Slides
=> /about-me.gmi About

=> https://gitea.esy.fun code
=> https://espial.esy.fun/u:yogsototh bookmarks
=> https://espial.esy.fun/u:yogsototh/notes notes
