# About me
keywords:  social
author:  Yann Esposito
email:  yann@esposito.host
=> /files/publickey.txt gpg
______
If you are still waiting a reply from me.
Don't take it personally.
After reading Digital Minimalism[fn:dm] I decided to drastically protect
myself against most real-time notifications.
I try to look at my email everyday.
But it is not unusual I can skip a few days without checking any notification.
So I'll answer, it can just take a lot of time.
My preferred way to be contacted is via encrypted email.
This will certainly be the best way for me to notice you among notifications.
______
[fn:dm] http://www.calnewport.com/books/digital-minimalism/
# Contact
* email: yann@esposito.host
* gpg: 
=> files/publickey.txt CB420F8005F1A662
PDF resumes:
=> files/yann-esposito-resume.pdf resume
=> files/yann-esposito-long-resume.pdf detailled resume
## Social
* github:  
=> https://github.com/yogsototh github/yogsototh
* my bookmarks: 
=> https://pinboard.in/u:yogsototh pinboard/u:yogsototh
* microblog: 
=> https://twitter.com/yogsototh @yogsototh
* lobste.rs:  
=> https://lobste.rs/u/yogsototh /u/yogsototh
With some self-hosted alternatives:
* code: 
=> https://gitea.esy.fun/yogsototh gitea.esy.fun
* bookmarks: 
=> https://espial.esy.fun/u:yogsototh espial.esy.fun
* microblog: 
=> https://espial.esy.fun/u:yogsototh/notes espial.esy.fun
# Who am I?
My Internet presence is mostly known from older blog post.
In particular:
=> http://yannesposito.com/Scratch/en/blog/Learn-Vim-Progressively/ Learn Vim Progressively
=> http://yannesposito.com/Scratch/en/blog/Haskell-the-Hard-Way/ Learn Haskell Fast and Hard
=> http://yannesposito.com/Scratch/en/blog/Yesod-tutorial-for-newbies/ Haskell Web Programming
=> http://yannesposito.com/Scratch/en/blog/Category-Theory-Presentation/ Category Theory Presentation
## Work
I'm a functional programmer, working remotely for Cisco.
I work in Clojure and use Haskell/Purescript during the weekends.
I am part of a full remote team.
I work on the backend and I'm particularly specialized in Authentication.
I wrote a full OAuth2 and OpenID Connect Provider in Clojure.
Right now there is no plan to make it opensource.
Here is are my resumes in PDF format:
=> files/yann-esposito-resume.pdf resume
=> files/yann-esposito-long-resume.pdf detailled resume
## Tooling
In our programmer community, tooling is essential.
* macOS

=> https://nixos.org nix with 
=> https://github.com/nix-community/home-manager home-manager

=> https://yadm.io yadm for things home-manager had difficult to handle
=> https://www.gnu.org/software/emacs/ emacs (former vim user)

=> https://github.com/hlissner/doom-emacs doom-emacs (used 
=> https://www.spacemacs.org spacemacs before)

=> https://orgmode.org org-mode / 
=> https://github.com/bastibe/org-journal org-journal / 
=> https://www.orgroam.com org-roam

=> https://magit.vc magit / 
=> https://magit.vc/manual/forge/ forge / 
=> https://github.com/charignon/github-review github-review
=> https://weechat.org weechat

=> https://github.com/wee-slack/wee-slack wee-slack
## Internet consumption
### News
=> https://lobste.rs/ lobsters
=> https://news.ycombinator.com/ HN
=> https://laarc.io laarc
=> https://www.discoverdev.io discoverdev
=> https://reddit.com/r/haskell /r/haskell
=> https://reddit.com/r/clojure /r/clojure
### RSS
I mostly consume them via 
=> https://github.com/skeeto/elfeed elfeed in emacs:
**** Imported Feeds                                               :elfeed:
***** news                                                       :news:
****** 
=> https://hnrss.org/newest?points=1200 HN
****** 
=> https://beepb00p.xyz/atom.xml beepb00p.xyz                                             :tech:
****** 
=> https://esoteric.codes/rss esoteric.codes                                           :tech:
***** haskell                                                    :haskell:fp:
****** 
=> http://feeds.feedburner.com/ezyang Inside 206-105
****** 
=> http://blog.jle.im/rss in Code — Entries
****** 
=> http://5outh.blogspot.com/feeds/posts/default Abstract Nonsense
****** 
=> http://byorgey.wordpress.com/feed/ blog :: Brent -> String
****** 
=> http://www.haskellforall.com/feeds/posts/default Haskell for all
****** 
=> http://themonadreader.wordpress.com/feed/ The Monad.Reader
****** 
=> http://blog.poisson.chat/./rss.xml Lysxia's blog
****** 
=> http://blog.docmunch.com/blog?format=rss The Docmunch blog
****** 
=> http://bitemyapp.com/rss.xml bitemyapp
****** 
=> http://www.serpentine.com/blog/feed/ teideal glic deisbhéalach
****** 
=> http://sigfpe.blogspot.com/feeds/posts/default A Neighborhood of Infinity
****** 
=> http://neilmitchell.blogspot.com/feeds/posts/default Neil Mitchell's Haskell Blog
****** 
=> http://blog.jakubarnold.cz/feed.xml Jakub Arnold Blog
***** Functional                                                 :fp:
****** 
=> https://christine.website/blog.rss Christine Dodrill
****** 
=> http://martintrojer.github.io/atom.xml Martin's Blog
****** 
=> http://lambda-the-ultimate.org/rss.xml Lambda the Ultimate
****** 
=> http://feeds.feedburner.com/7sharp9 7Sharp9
****** 
=> http://okmij.org/ftp/rss.xml oleg
***** clojure                                                    :clojure:fp:
****** 
=> http://blog.juxt.pro/rss.xml JUXT Blog
****** 
=> http://feeds.cognitect.com/blog/feed.rss Cognitect Blog
***** misc                                                       :misc:
****** 
=> https://nesslabs.com/feed nesslabs                                                 :life:
****** 
=> https://solar.lowtechmagazine.com/feeds/all.rss.xml lowtechmag
***** Philo                                                      :philo:
****** 
=> https://bluelabyrinths.com/category/philosophy/feed/ bluelabyrinths
# former websites
* https://yannesposito.com ✞ 2016
* http://yann.esposito.free.fr ✞ 2007

=> /index.gmi Home
=> /gem-atom.xml Feed
=> /slides.gmi Slides
=> /about-me.gmi About

=> https://gitea.esy.fun code
=> https://espial.esy.fun/u:yogsototh bookmarks
=> https://espial.esy.fun/u:yogsototh/notes notes
