# Add links to code block during orgmode export
date:  [2020-02-29 Sat]
author:  Yann Esposito
email:  yann@esposito.host
=> /files/publickey.txt gpg
keywords:  org-mode blog
description:  Add links to code block during orgmode export.

I wanted to add a link to the file I export with org tangle.
And it was surprisingly difficult to find.
Apparently I am one of the few people that use orgmode the way I do.

Using orgmode file as markdown to blog.
And exporting to a different file some code block.
So I often endup writing something like:

```org
..begin_src elisp :tangle foo.el
```

I tangle the source code that export the code block to an external file.
Then I use this hook during HTML export to add a caption with the link the
file I tangled:

```elisp :tangle org_html_export_show_tangle.el
(defun my-add-link-to-tangled-files (backend)
  "Add a link just before source code block with tangled files.
BACKEND is the export backend. Used as symbol."
  (while ;; (re-search-forward )
      (re-search-forward "^\\( *\\)#\\+begin_src .*:tangle \\([^\s\n]*\\)" nil t)
    (replace-match "\\1#+CAPTION:

=> ./\\2 =\\2=
\n\\&")))

(add-hook 'org-export-before-processing-hook
          'my-add-link-to-tangled-files)
```

And this article is an example of the result.
The link with the listing is generated automatically for me.

A small note regarding CSS.
My =pre= have a =margin-top=.
But I wanted to get rid of it when the previous block was a =label=.
This is achievable with:

```css
label + pre {margin-top: 0;}
```

That's it.
It took me really a long time to just think about using caption, and not
trying something smarter like injecting html code, etc...
So I hope it could help someone.

=> /index.gmi Home
=> /gem-atom.xml Feed
=> /slides.gmi Slides
=> /about-me.gmi About

=> https://git.esy.fun code
=> https://espial.esy.fun/u:yogsototh bookmarks
=> https://espial.esy.fun/u:yogsototh/notes notes
