# A quick CORS proxy in a few lines of Clojure
description: 
keywords:  clojure CORS web
author:  Yann Esposito
email:  yann@esposito.host
=> /files/publickey.txt gpg
date:  [2024-03-08 Fri]

When I open a new tab in my browser I see my hand-made starter homepage.
This is a single HTML file on my computer.
Not a hosted website.
This homepage is really useful and along the years I added some functionalities:
* organized links for my most frequently used websites
* direct text input to some specialized search engines
* work related links to a lot of different places, I see the APIs, the version
  number of the deployed nodes, etc…
* my daily work tasks are displayed there (from org-mode calendar to this page)

One of the section of links in this homepage contain a few websites I host.
And I wanted to query these websites to make a health check from my file.
It turns out that you cannot easily make a HTTP call to any external website
from a =file://= in your Browser as your are almost immediately blocked by /CORS/.

I don't want to explain how /CORS/ are working.
The important point is that it is a security measure that is *very easy* to circumvent.

Here is how to do it:

1. Create a webservice that will play a role of "proxy". For example, the
   webservice will read the ~?url=DESTINATION_URL~.
2. When receiving a request, the server will make a similar HTTP call to
   ~DESTINATION_URL~ and keep track of the ~Origin~ HTTP header of the request.
3. Take the response from ~DESTINATION_URL~ and add a few headers, in particular
   add the ~Access-Control-Allow-Origin~ header that will contain the value in the
   ~Origin~ header of the request.

That's it.

So I wrote that in few minutes and use it now. So I can make these call and
detect when I see my homepage if one of my hosted website is not reachable.

# The Clojure code

Here is the code in a few lines of Clojure:

```clojure
(ns fuck-cors-app.core
  (:require
    [clj-http.client :as client]
    [ring.adapter.jetty :as jetty]
    [ring.middleware.params :refer [wrap-params]]
    [fuck-cors.core :refer [wrap-open-cors]])
  (:gen-class))

(defn handler
  [request]
  (if-let [url (get-in request [:query-params "url"])]
    (client/request {:request-method (:request-method request)
                     :url url})
    {:status 200
     :headers {"Content-Type" "text/plain; charset=utf-8"}
     :body "Let's bypass CORS ok?"}))

(defn -main
  [& _args]
  (jetty/run-jetty
    (-> handler
        (wrap-params)
        (wrap-open-cors))
    {:port 1977
     :host "127.0.0.1"}))
```

And that's it, this is a whole web application that will proxy any call to a
website that do not allow you to call from some origin (like my =file://=) and
will make it work anyway.

If you feel that using too many libraries is cheating, here is the actual almost full
content of the lib taking care of handling CORS:

```clojure
(defn- host-from-req
  [request]
  (str (-> request :scheme name)
       "://"
       (get-in request [:headers "host"])))

(defn- get-header
  [request header-name]
  (let [rawref (get-in request [:headers header-name])]
    (if rawref
        (clojure.string/replace rawref #"(http://[^/]*).*$" "$1")
        nil)))

(defn wrap-open-cors
  "Open your Origin Policy to Everybody, no limit"
  [handler]
  (fn [request]
    (let [origin (get-header request "origin")
          referer (get-header request "referer")
          host (host-from-req request)
          origins (if origin
                    origin
                    (if referer
                      referer
                      host))
          headers {"Access-Control-Allow-Origin" origins
                   "Access-Control-Allow-Headers" "Origin, X-Requested-With, Content-Type, Accept, Cache-Control, Accept-Language, Accept-Encoding, Authorization"
                   "Access-Control-Allow-Methods" "HEAD, GET, POST, PUT, DELETE, OPTIONS, TRACE"
                   "Access-Control-Allow-Credentials" "true"
                   "Access-Control-Expose-Headers" "content-length"
                   "Vary" "Accept-Encoding, Origin, Accept-Language"}]
      (-> (handler request)
          (update-in [:headers] #(into % headers))))))

(defn wrap-preflight
  "Add a preflight answer. Will break any OPTIONS handler, beware.
  To put AFTER wrap-open-cors"
  [handler]
  (fn [request]
    (if (= (request :request-method) :options)
      (into request {:status 200 :body "preflight complete"})
      (handler request))))
```

I wrote it a long time ago, and I think I just found a potential bug related to the headers.
I should probably retrieve all headers returned by the response, and add these
header name to the ~Access-Control-Allow-Headers~. But this list of allowed
headers will work most of the time.

*Edit*: I fixed this lib, here is the new code:

```clojure
(defn- host-from-req
  [request]
  (str (-> request :scheme name)
       "://"
       (get-in request [:headers "host"])))

(defn- get-header
  [request header-name]
  (let [rawref (get-in request [:headers header-name])]
    (if rawref
        (string/replace rawref #"(http://[^/]*).*$" "$1")
        nil)))

(defn wrap-open-cors
  "Open your Origin Policy to Everybody, no limit"
  [handler]
  (fn [request]
    (let [origin  (get-header request "origin")
          referer (get-header request "referer")
          host    (host-from-req request)
          origins (if origin
                    origin
                    (if referer
                      referer
                      host))
          {:keys [headers] :as original-response} (handler request)
          resp-cors-headers
          {"Access-Control-Allow-Origin" origins
           "Access-Control-Allow-Headers" (string/join "," (keys headers))
           "Access-Control-Allow-Methods" "HEAD, GET, PATCH, POST, CONNECT, PUT, DELETE, OPTIONS, TRACE"
           "Access-Control-Allow-Credentials" "true"
           "Access-Control-Expose-Headers" (string/join "," (keys headers))}]
      (-> original-response
          (update-in [:headers] #(into % resp-cors-headers))))))
```


# Bonus frontend code to check the availability of a website

As a bonus here is the code I use in my homepage to see if the website I am
looking for are reachable or not.

Imagine you have an HTML block like this:

```html
<div class="healthcheck">
  ...
  <a href="SOME_URL">website 1</a>
  ...
  <a href="SOME_URL">website 2</a>
  ...
</div>
```

I have a CSS rule that change the background of these link to green or red if I
add the class ~ok~ or ~error~ to the ~<a>~.
And here is the javascript code:

```javascript
// You can replace corsproxy.org (which is a public one)
// by the one you are hoting.
const corsproxyurl='https://corsproxy.org/?';
async function healthchecklink(a) {
  var linkurl=a.href;
  if (linkurl != undefined) {
    var url = corsproxyurl + encodeURIComponent(linkurl);
    try {
      var response = await fetch(url, {method: 'GET',
                                       redirect: 'manual',
                                       signal: AbortSignal.timeout(3000)
                                      });
      if (response.ok || response.redirected || response.status === 0 ) {
        a.classList.add("ok");
      } else {
        a.classList.add("error");
      }
    } catch (err) {
      a.classList.add("error");
    }
  }
}

function checkhealth() {
  var links = document.querySelectorAll('.healthcheck a');
  for (l in links) {
    healthchecklink(links[l]);
  }
}

checkhealth();
```

Notice the ~response.status == 0~, this is due to one of my website returning a
303 redirection but some complication make it returns a status 0.
If there were an error it would return an error status.

That's it.
Another tool I created myself to prevent me using a service checking for the
status of my website and sending me notifications about it.
None of my website is crucial enough not be ok to wait a few hours to be re-enabled.

=> /index.gmi Home
=> /gem-atom.xml Feed
=> /slides.gmi Slides
=> /about-me.gmi About

=> https://git.esy.fun code
=> https://espial.esy.fun/u:yogsototh bookmarks
=> https://espial.esy.fun/u:yogsototh/notes notes
