# My first ChatGPT exchange
description:  My first interaction with ChatGPT about Clojure and Monads.
keywords:  machine-learning ai gpt
author:  Yann Esposito
email:  yann@esposito.host
=> /files/publickey.txt gpg
date:  [2022-12-11 Sun]


# The first few questions for ChatGPT

I finally opened an account to beta-test ChatGPT.
I must say, I am quite impressed.
I asked it a few questions that I could have asked during an interview.
To my surprise, the answer given was, while wrong, believable enough to kind of
sneak the answer as right up to some imprecision.
Like if you squint enough, it could pass, but if you pay attention it is clearly
false.

So yes, mainly ChatGPT in this interaction was quite good at being convincing.
This is the same kind of impression you have from looking at AI generated images.
At first sight everything seems fine, but if you start looking to the details, many
things are off.

So here is the full interaction, I'll let the attentive reader find the
technical problems:


{{{logo}}} Can you write a clojure function that will reverse any string provided to it.

______

*ChatGPT*: Sure, here's a possible implementation of a function that reverses a string in Clojure:

```clojure
(defn reverse-string [s]
  (apply str (reverse (seq s))))
```

This function takes a strings as input, converts it to a sequence of characters
using the ~seq~ function, reverses this sequence using the reverse function, and
then converts the resulting sequence back to a string using the ~apply~ and ~str~
functions.

Here's an example of how you can use this function:
```clojure
user=> (reverse-string "hello world")
"dirow olleh"
```


Note that this function only works
for strings that contain characters in the Unicode Basic Multilingual Plane
(BMP), since the ~seq~ function only works on strings that contain characters in
this range.
If you need to reverse strings that contain characters outside of the BMP, you
can use the ~string-seq~ function instead of ~seq~ to convert the string to a
sequence of characters.
______

{{{logo}}} How would this function react if instead of string you provide an integer?

______
*ChatGPT:* If you provide an integer as input to the ~reverse-string~ function instead of a
string, the function will fail with a ~ClassCastException~ because the ~seq~
function only works on strings, and you cannot convert an integer to a string in
a straightforward way in Clojure.
The ~seq~ function expects its input to be a string or a collection, such as a
vector or a list, and when you try to pass an integer to it, it will try to
convert the integer to a string by calling the ~str~ function on it.
However, since ~str~ only works on strings and collections, and not on numbers,
this will result in a ~ClassCastException~.

Here's an example of what will happen if you try to pass an integer to the reverse-string function:

```clojure
user=> (reverse-string 12345)
ClassCastException clojure.lang. Numbers cannot be cast to
clojure.lang. IFn clojure.core/seq (core.clj:136)
```

To avoid this error, you can either make sure that the input to the
~reverse-string~ function is always a string, or you can modify the function to
handle other types of input, such as integers, by first converting them to
strings using the ~str~ function.
For example, you could write the ~reverse-string~ function like this to handle
both strings and integers as input:

```clojure
(defn reverse-string [s]
(let [s (if (string? s) s (str s))]
  (apply str (reverse (seq s)))))
```

With this version of the function, if you pass an integer as input, the function
will convert it to a string using the ~str~ function before calling the ~seq~
function on it, so the ~seq~ function will be able to work with the input.
Here's an example of how you can use this modified version of the
~reverse-string~ function:

```clojure
user-> (reverse-string "hello world")
"dlrow olleh"

user=> (reverse-string 12345)
"54321"
```

Note that the modified version of the function will also work for other types of
input that can be converted to strings using the ~str~ function, such as floats
and booleans.

______

{{{logo}}} How would you use the concept of the Maybe monad in Haskell in this clojure function?

______
*ChatGPT*: The Maybe monad in Haskell is a way to represent computations that may or may
not have & p a result, and it provides a way to compose these computations in a
safe and predictable way.
In Clojure, the Maybe monad is usually implemented as a ~Option~ type, which has
two possible values: ~Some~ and ~None~

In the context of the ~reverse-string~ function, you could use the ~Option~ type
to represent the possibility that the input to the function might not be a
string, in which case the function would return ~None~ instead of a reversed
string.
Here's an example of how you could use the ~Option~ type to modify the
~reverse-string~ function to handle the case where the input is not a string:

```clojure
(defn reverse-string [s]
  (if (string? s)
    (Some (apply str (reverse (seq s))))
    None))
```

With this version of the ~reverse-string~ function, if the input is a string, the
function will return a ~Some~ value containing the reversed string, and if the
input is not a string, the function will return a ~None~ value.
This allows the caller of the function to handle the case where the input is not
a string in a predictable and safe way.

Here's an example of how you can use this modified version of the ~reverse-string~
function:

```clojure
user=> (reverse-string "hello world")

Some "dlrow olleh"
user=> (reverse-string 12345)
None
```

Note that the Option type in Clojure does not provide the same syntactic sugar
for composing computations as the Maybe monad in Haskell, so you cannot use the
~>>=~ operator to chain calls to the ~reverse-string~ function in the same way you
can in Haskell.
However, you can still use the ~Option~ type to represent computations that may
or may not have a result, and you can use the ~match~ or ~case~ forms to pattern
match on the ~Option~ values and handle the different cases in a predictable and
safe way.

______

{{{logo}}} How would you implement Option in clojure?

______
*ChatGPT*:
In Clojure, the ~Option~ type is typically implemented as a sealed protocol,
which is a type of polymorphic type that defines a set of concrete types that
implement the protocol.

The ~Option~ protocol typically defines two concrete types: ~Some~, which represents
a computation that has a result, and ~None~, which represents a computation that
does not have a result.

Here's an example of how you could define the ~Option~ protocol and the ~Some~ and
~None~ types in Clojure:

```clojure
(defprotocol Option
  (map [o f])
  (flat-map [o f]))

(deftype Some [x]
  Option
  (map [o f] (Some (f x)))
  (flat-map [o f] (f x)))

(deftype None [])
  Option
  (map [o f] None)
  (flat-map [o f] None))
```

The ~Option~ protocol defines two methods: ~map~ and ~flat-map~ The ~map~ method takes a
function ~f~ as input and applies it to the value contained in the ~Some~ type, ~f~ it
exists, or returns a ~None~ value ~f~ the ~Option~ type is ~None~ The ~flat-map~ method is
similar to ~map~ but it allows the function ~f~ to return an ~Option~ value, which is
then flattened into the outer ~Option~ value.

The ~Some~ type implements the ~Option~ protocol by providing concrete
implementations ~f~ the map and ~flat-map~ methods.
The 'map method applies the function ~f~ to the value ~x~ contained in the ~Some~
type, and returns a new ~Some~ value containing the result ~f~ the function.
The ~flat-map~ method applies the function ~f~ to the value ~x~ contained in the Some
type, and then flattens the resulting ~Option~ value into the outer ~Option~ value.

The ~None~ type also implements the Option protocol by providing concrete
implementations of the ~map~ and ~flat-map~ methods.
The ~map~ and ~flat-map~ methods simply return a ~None~ value in this case, since
there is no value to apply the function to.

Here's an example of how you can use the ~Option~ protocol and the ~Some~ and ~None~ types:

```clojure
user=> (def some-value (Some 12345))
#' user/some-value

user=> (map some-value inc)
Some 12346

user=> (flat-map some-value (fn [x] (Some (* × 2))))
Some 24690

user=> (map some-value (comp (partial * 2) inc))
Some 24690

user=> (def none-value None)
#'user/none-value

user=> (map none-value inc)
None

user=> (flat-map none-value (fn [x] (Some (* × 2))))
None

user=> (map none-value (comp (partial * 2) inc))
None
```

In this example, the ~some-value~ variable is defined as a ~Some~ value containing
the integer 12345, and the ~none-value~ variable is defined as a ~None~ value.
The ~map~ and ~flat-map~ functions are then used to apply different functions to the
values contained in the ~Option~ types, and the...
______


=> /index.gmi Home
=> /gem-atom.xml Feed
=> /slides.gmi Slides
=> /about-me.gmi About

=> https://gitea.esy.fun code
=> https://espial.esy.fun/u:yogsototh bookmarks
=> https://espial.esy.fun/u:yogsototh/notes notes
