# My personal environment sync
description: 
keywords:  programming
author:  Yann Esposito
email:  yann@esposito.host
=> /files/publickey.txt gpg
date:  [2021-10-30 Sat]

I have a quite specific system that I improved along the years to manage my
local environment.
Think about, binaries I expect to have in my shell, as well as
configuration files for various utilities, and a few personal scripts.

The notion of what is exactly my local environment is not perfectly defined.
I expect every of my computers to behave slightly differently.
Some are for work-only, some personal use only.

For the things I want everywhere, I have a peculiar personal system.

I use a personal script that depends on

=> https://yadm.io yadm
 and

=> https://github.com/nix-community/home-manager home-manager

My script try to check if some files where updated and react accordingly:

1. I download the dot-files changes via =yadm=.
2. If my home-manager files changes, it will run ~home-manager switch~
   ; if it fails, try to update nix channels then try again.
3. If my doom emacs packages changed, it will run ~doom sync~
4. If the script itself changed, it re-run the script after updating itself.

If the script detect that I changed my emacs configuration, it runs ~doom
sync~ or ~doom sync -u~.

Here it is:

```bash
#!/bin/bash

### logs fn helpers

## colors for tput
# black=0
red=1
green=2
yellow=3
blue=4
# magenta=5
# cyan=6
# white=7
highpr() {
    printf "$(tput setaf $green)→$(tput sgr0) $(tput bold)%-60s$(tput sgr0)" "$*"
}
ok() {
    local txt="OK"
    echo -e " [$(tput bold)$(tput setaf $green)${txt}$(tput sgr0)]" >&2
}
info() {
    echo -e " [$(tput bold)$(tput setaf $blue)$*$(tput sgr0)]" >&2
}
warn() {
    echo -e "$(tput bold)$(tput setaf $yellow)$*$(tput sgr0)" >&2
}
err() {
    echo -e "$(tput bold)$(tput setaf $red)$*$(tput sgr0)" >&2
}
fail() {
    err -e "\n[ERR] $*"
    exit 1
}

highpr "check nix"
if ! [ -x "$(command -v nix)" ]; then
    echo
    err "nix does not seem to be installed."
    err "Install it from: https://nixos.org/nix/"
    exit 1
fi
ok

highpr "yadm fetch"
yadm fetch --quiet  || fail "yadm fetch failed"
ok

# check the hash of a few files before doing yadm pull
OLD_SYNC_ENV_ID=$(yadm rev-parse HEAD:bin/sync-env.sh)
OLD_HOME_MANAGER_ID=$(yadm rev-parse HEAD:.config/nixpkgs/home.nix)
OLD_DOOM_PACKAGES=$(yadm rev-parse HEAD:.doom.d/packages.el)
OLD_DOOM_INIT=$(yadm rev-parse HEAD:.doom.d/init.el)

highpr "yadm pull"
yadm pull --quiet || fail "yadm pull failed"
ok

# check the hash of a few files after doing yadm pull
NEW_SYNC_ENV_ID=$(yadm rev-parse HEAD:bin/sync-env.sh)
NEW_HOME_MANAGER_ID=$(yadm rev-parse HEAD:.config/nixpkgs/home.nix)
NEW_DOOM_PACKAGES=$(yadm rev-parse HEAD:.doom.d/packages.el)
NEW_DOOM_INIT=$(yadm rev-parse HEAD:.doom.d/init.el)

highpr "check sync-env diff"
if ! [ "$OLD_SYNC_ENV_ID" = "$NEW_SYNC_ENV_ID" ]; then
    warn " changed"
    warn " Starting ~/bin/sync-env.sh again"
    echo
    ~/bin/sync-env.sh
    exit $?
fi
ok

if [ -f "$HOME/.yadm/files.gpg" ]; then
  highpr "yadm decrypt"
  yadm decrypt || fail "yadm decrypt failed"
  ok
fi

highpr "home-manager"
USERNAME_NIX_FILE="$HOME/.config/nixpkgs/username.nix"
if [ ! -f  "$USERNAME_NIX_FILE" ]; then
  echo "\"$USER\"" >> "$USERNAME_NIX_FILE"
fi
if ! [ "$OLD_HOME_MANAGER_ID" = "$NEW_HOME_MANAGER_ID" ]; then
    echo
    highpr "home-manager switch"
    home-manager switch || \
      ( nix-channel --update && home-manager switch ) || \
      fail "home-manager switch failed"
    ok
else
    info "skipped"
fi

highpr "doom-emacs"
doompath="$HOME/.emacs.d/bin/doom"
if ! [ "$OLD_DOOM_PACKAGES" = "$NEW_DOOM_PACKAGES" ] || \
   ! [ "$OLD_DOOM_INIT"     = "$NEW_DOOM_INIT"  ]; then
  if =>  -x $doompath ; then
      echo
      highpr "doom sync"
      $doompath sync || fail "doom failed to sync"
      ok
  else
     fail "Cannot find doom executable at $doompath";
  fi
else
   info "skipped"
fi
```

## Bootstrapping

Bootstrapping this system is always a nice problem to think about.
It is smooth when everything is set but to bootstrap it I need binaries
installed by this system...
So...
How to handle the dependency cycle correctly?

To minimize the pain, I removed more and more bootstrapping dependencies.
Now my almost single dependence for bootstrapping my environment is =nix=.
I haven't initialized any machine for a long time now.
The following should work.

0. Use fish[fn:fish]  ~chsh /bin/fish~
1. Install nix
   ~curl -L https://nixos.org/nix/install | sh~
2. Install home-manager
   ```bash
   nix-channel --add https://github.com/nix-community/home-manager/archive/release-21.05.tar.gz home-manager
   nix-channel --update
   export NIX_PATH=$HOME/.nix-defexpr/channels${NIX_PATH:+:}$NIX_PATH
   nix-shell '<home-manager>' -A install
   ```
3. Install and use ~yadm~
   ```bash
   nix-shell -p yadm
   yadm boostrap
   yadm remote set-url origin <url-to-my-dot-files-repo>
   yadm pull
   ```
4. Still in the =nix-shell= with =yadm= run ~~/bin/sync-env.sh~


There is a risk that step 3 fail because I pin most of my packages in
home-manager configuration, and it will try to install =yadm=. This can
conflict with the =yadm= installed in the current =nix-shell=.
So sometime I need to:

1. Remove the line installing =yadm= in my home-manager configuration first
2. run =home-manager sync=
3. get out of the =nix-shell=,
4. add =yadm= back in the =home-manager= config
5. run =home-manager sync= again, but this time out of the =nix-shell=.
6. Finally I can run my =~/bin/sync-env.sh= command.

So this post will probably be useful as a personal note in the future.
Because bootstrapping is generally not trivial.
I will probably update this post if something is missing.

[fn:fish] I use fish for interactive shell. I use ~zsh~ for quick dirty
scripts (a lot better than bash), and I switch to

=> https://hackage.haskell.org/package/turtle turtle
 if I need to be
serious about the script.

=> /index.gmi Home
=> /gem-atom.xml Feed
=> /slides.gmi Slides
=> /about-me.gmi About

=> https://git.esy.fun code
=> https://espial.esy.fun/u:yogsototh bookmarks
=> https://espial.esy.fun/u:yogsototh/notes notes
