# AI Assistant return of experience
description:  My return of experience from using AI agents again into a big real-world production ready project.
keywords:  llm ai agent claude gpt chatgpt copilot
author:  Yann Esposito
email:  yann@esposito.host
=> /files/publickey.txt gpg
date:  [2025-07-03 Thu]

______
*TL;DR of TL;DR:* With the correct setup LLM-based AI Assistant have their place
in the Software Developer tool-belt.
______

______
*TL;DR:*

1. *Evaluations*
   - The Good:
     - =(++)= answering specific technical questions (with references),
     - =(++)= write small unreliable scripts nor prod-level quality (if helped)
     - =(+)= simple/repetitive coding tasks, boilerplate,
     - =(+)= review
     - =(+)= documentation writing
   - The Bad:
     - =(-)= test writing
     - =(-)= Perform specific, small, and easy (beginner junior) production-ready programming task.
   - The Ugly:
     - =(--)= Big tasks that would require a lot of intermediate steps.
     - =(---)= Code a feature with a production quality. It is a lot faster and
       more reliable to code manually. Almost all invested time was lost.
2. *Setup:* need to support *AI Agent*, *MCP* (Clojure-MCP in particular!), *RAG*
3. *Limitations:* bullshitting, non-verbal reasoning, complex coding tasks, self reference
4. *Conclusions:*
   - Main lesson: Great for small and easy tasks but you already need some expertise.
   - Using AI Agent is a skill like learning other tools like =git=.
     - They bring value and are an improvement
     - never blindly trust ; always double check the answers
     - Learn what you can and cannot delegate
   - I would say that you can *PARTIALLY* delegate about 20% of the daily tasks; code
     review, documentation, code analysis.
   - WORKS VERY POORLY without advanced latest setup (MCP, RAG, reasoning, agent
     behavior), probably cost a lot.
   - AI Workflows potentially superior to AI Agents?
______

# Introduction

My past encounters with LLMs were far from impressive. So, what made me decide
to give them another chance?

* I saw a

=> https://github.com/cloudflare/workers-oauth-provider/?tab=readme-ov-file#written-using-claude GitHub repository showing a full OAuth2 Provider
 built using Claude.
  One commit per prompt.
  I didn't follow all commits, but it was nice to see that this was possible.

=> https://github.com/bhauman/clojure-mcp Clojure-MCP
 ; I didn't knew at that time precisely how that could be a game
  changer, but it is.
* Heard good things about Claude for programming and I saw a few web app made
  from just a few directives.


# The Setup
Setting things up was not straightforward.
But once done I must admit I was really impressed.

I feel AI Agent are now like Versioning System (=git=) and Build Systems (=make=).
These are tools worthy of learning.
But from my experience they only provide value if you have a full setup:
* *Agent*: The AI needs to work on its own, handling several connected tasks
  without asking for your input every time.
* *Clojure-MCP*; it makes these tools way better, even if you code in another language.
* *RAG*; the system must support file/buffer context to add in order to be able to
  follow your project best practices.

See

=> https://her.esy.fun/posts/0029-ai-assistants-in-doom-emacs-31-on-macos-with-clojure-mcp-server/index.html my previous article
 to see all details of my current setup.

# Limitations

Before we dig into what these tools does well, let’s be clear about what they
can’t handle. It is important to know these limits not to lose your time.
You can ask people, and even the AI assistant itself about its limitations.
This give a first broad idea, mainly when human is deeply involved.
But there are also very precises tasks for which these system provide poor results.

## Counting

Language models are notoriously bad at counting. Now, they have more and more
tools at their disposal to help them count. But don't trust them.

First

______
> How many r are in recursively?

To count the letter 'r' in the word "recursively", I'll examine each letter:

r-e-c-u-r-s-i-v-e-l-y

Looking at each position:
1. r - this is an 'r' ✓
2. e - not an 'r'
3. c - not an 'r'
4. u - not an 'r'
5. r - this is an 'r' ✓
6. s - not an 'r'
7. i - not an 'r'
8. v - not an 'r'
9. e - not an 'r'
10. l - not an 'r'
11. y - not an 'r'

There are *2* letter 'r's in the word "recursively".
______

Good :). But it was a bit verbose.
Let's try again

______
> How many r are in recursively? Be succinct and direct.

There are 3 r's in "recursively".
______

In fact, event, when not asking to be succinct, I got some errors (counting up to
3 or 4).

## Self reference

Now, let's try to make the Agent self aware of its own answer, yeah, this is
exactly the tricky question LLMs are bad at:

______
> Good now could you give me the number of letter in your next answer?

This answer contains exactly 12 letters.

> How many letters are there in "This answer contains exactly 12 letters."?

I need to count the letters in the phrase "This answer contains exactly 12 letters."
Let me count each character that is a letter (excluding spaces, punctuation, and numbers):
"This answer contains exactly 12 letters."

T-h-i-s (4) + a-n-s-w-e-r (6) + c-o-n-t-a-i-n-s (8) + e-x-a-c-t-l-y (7) + l-e-t-t-e-r-s (7)

Total: 4 + 6 + 8 + 7 + 7 = 32 letters

There are *32 letters* in "This answer contains exactly 12 letters."

The statement is self-contradictory since it claims to contain exactly 12 letters but actually contains 32 letters.
______

## Algebraic reasoning

When asking about using transducer for a solution already using the function
~reduce~ it simply wasn't able to do it.
The LLM can regurgitate the definition of transducers and how they work.
But doing such a transformation need some algebraic reasoning that is pretty
alien to language reasoning. Like counting (arithmetic reasoning) it fails flat.


# Productivity Gain
## =(--)= Hard/Advanced Programming

First, let's make it clear.
For real, production-ready, quality development or complex tasks with advanced
requirements these tools are a *NET NEGATIVE*.

If the task at hand is not small in scope, with a clear specification
the system will act as a /confidently wrong junior developer/.
In the end, most your time will be lost.

Worse than that, discovering the problems generated by the tools will not be
a trivial task, and in the end result in a lot more time loss than if you would
simply not have used any AI Agent.

So be conscious about the difficulty of the task at hand.

## =(+)= Boilerplate

For writing boilerplate code following your project's best practices I would say
my experience was positive.
Some subtle errors could appear, and this was not great.
Still, it is faster to use the AI for the boilerplate than typing it yourself
most of the time.

## =(++)= Small disposable scripts that don't need to be reliable

If you need to write a script that don't need to be highly reliable.
In that case, I can say my experience was a *BIG NET POSITIVE*.
It worked because the tasks to write this script was:
* small in scope
* clear technical design

It built he tool for me in a few seconds which would have taken me more time
just typing it.

An important remark however, is that if you know what would be the "Best tool
for the work", this would also tremendously improve the speed and quality of the
result.

I asked the Agent to build the same tool twice. First in bash, second
using

=> https://babashka.org babashka
. And for my specific need, not only it was a lot faster to build
the tool using babashka, but the result was clearly superior both in design and
quality as well as efficiency.

## =(+)= PR Reviewing

I think a nice use case of AI Assistant is to ask it to generate a review of
your PR locally prior to send it to show it to your team.
* about 10% is plain wrong and MUST be ignored
* 70% not useful, but could be ignored,
* *20%* are good recommendations.

While 20% is not much, this is still a net positive.
Personally I feel that using AI just for review would already be a good reason to
add them to your tool-belt.

## =(++)= Asking specific technical details about your own project

Using RAG + Clojure-MCP to search and discover the details of your Project, this
ended up being very useful.

I work on a huge base code. We created a full platform from scratch that
contains hundreds of technical details.
Some of them are long forgotten in some documentation, and some were not even
cleanly documented due to time pressure during the delivery.

Still I could ask these very specific questions and got a clear answer.
Of course, as you should never trust the system fully, I asked for the source
code and documentation to be able to verify the answer.
And it worked perfectly.

Typically I could ask "What is the HTTP Header to use for this
specific feature?" and it looks at the code and returns the value with a small
documentation and pointer to the sources.

## =(+)= Writing doc

While everything must be proofread because *you cannot fully trust the Agent*,
this generally gives a good first pass overview and can generate a documentation
of mediocre quality.
If you want a good documentation it will need a lot more time.
But I still give a positive outcome as existing and bad documentation is still a
net positive comparatively to no documentation.

## =(-)= Writing tests

In my experience, asking these agent to write tests can either be a net positive
or a full net negative were I had to delete all generated tests.
So I wouldn't recommend using AI code generation for writing advanced tests cases.
But I feel this is fine for very specific small functions. And even there, you
really need to be cautious about passing tests that are not useful at all
and just give a false sense of safety.

Sometime it is just better to write the tests, at least the cases but not the
boilerplate, yourself to be sure you are testing the correct thing.

## =(++)= Familiarize with foreign code

The ability to generate a =PROJECT_SUMMARY.md= as suggested by the Clojure-MCP
tutorial, proves that these tool can really help grasp a new project. It's
structure, the generic ideas, etc…

This is not totally perfect, but I got impressive results, so this count as *NET
POSITIVE*.

# Conclusions

With this new tryout of the AI tools I could discover tasks for which they
are useful.
In terms of productivity, I believe their benefits depend tremendously on the
type of work you assign them. I feel they have a place as a daily-use tool,
particularly for pre-reviewing your code and helping you write documents.

To be effective you need to:

1. Use something at least as efficient as /Claude 4 Sonnet/; so an *Agent*
   with *Clojure-MCP* and *RAG* support.
2. Be conscious about the *scope* and *complexity* of the task
3. Be able to provide *precise technical specification* of the task
4. Always be conscious (evaluate and monitor) the time it would take to complete
   the task manually versus the time spent supervising the automated tool.

If you familiarize yourself with these agents, really try Clojure-MCP.
It is a game changer and that provide a pretty huge advantage to Clojure
comparatively to other programming languages.

=> /index.gmi Home
=> /gem-atom.xml Feed
=> /slides.gmi Slides
=> /about-me.gmi About

=> https://git.esy.fun code
=> https://espial.esy.fun/u:yogsototh bookmarks
=> https://espial.esy.fun/u:yogsototh/notes notes
