# On Scrumm
It is of good taste these day to critique Scrumm.
Here are my 2cents
# Personal Experience with Scrum:
## Discovering
* Fear and counter arguments
## Efficiency
* Time lost in meeting
## People tensions
* instead of tamming it made everything worse.
# Management: The root of all evil?
The root of the problem is between the developpers and the managers.
* Manager: I want a great product, I want to finish it fast, I want my customers to love it
* Developer: I want a great product, I want to finish it fast, I want customers to love it
What could go wrong?
* What Manager means: _I want a great product_:
  I want to sell it!
* What Developer means: _I want a great product_:
  I want it to use the last technology, with the last code organization/quality trends
* Manager: _I want to finish it fast_:
  I don't want to listen to technical discussion,
  this looks like something easy to do.
  It should be in my hand in few weeks.
* Developer: _I want to finish it fast_:
  I want to keep the code clean to be able to add new changes fast
  with confidence (without breaking anything)
  this certainly means, testing + testing environment + proofs ...

* Manager: _I want customer to love it_:
  They should buy more and more. The product should be useful.
* Developer:  _I want customer to love it_:
  User should enjoy using it. The product should be simple, clean, natural, beautiful.
The two meaning are'nt completely opposite.
Still they are quite different.
# What could we do about it?
How to solve the problem?
* Spoiler: _you can't_.
The root of all evil is "it looks easy, do it".
Proof, a guy made the same thing in PHP in 2003, or I saw the same shit in Flash around 1998.
You have two choices:
1. Use tools to finish your work fast, but the cost is very to maintain and modify.
2. Use tools that enforce quality, you'll have a starting cost.
Error not to do:
* Manager ask for something, you use your l337 H4X0R cape and you show him
  something in less than 10 minutes.
* Manager believe that everything should be as fast
* Discover what you did was just a terrible hack, and take 2 days to finish it
  correctly.
* Manager doesn't really understand why he _saw_ it right now, and has to wait
  many days to really have it in production.

=> /index.gmi Home
=> /gem-atom.xml Feed
=> /slides.gmi Slides
=> /about-me.gmi About

=> https://gitea.esy.fun code
=> https://espial.esy.fun/u:yogsototh bookmarks
=> https://espial.esy.fun/u:yogsototh/notes notes
